Because
I was in French school, you know, since I was in,
what do you call it, post-college. Post-college.
And then when I finished high school, about the
time, you know, the war,
you know, come in Vietnam by... We knew
the war, World War II, you know, was exciting in
Europe, but we didn't know The war would be spread
in South Asia, in Paris, until the day when the
Japanese, you know, when they came. Then we know,
you know, we feel or I feel, for my part, that the
World War II, you know, would touch Paris,
particularly Vietnam. Yeah. This was your high
school? Yeah. That's why I just finished high
school.
And the reason was I don't want to learn Japanese
language. Because I said I've been learning
French, and now there's no reason I can throw all
this away and then learn Japanese. That's the one
reason why I don't want to... So it's, you know, my
story, you know, is Japanese
language. And that's why, you know, I found a job in
the work,
you know, in the, in some of the I recall, you know,
the corporation was with H-14s that told us, you
know, from Vietnam out. That's during the
Japanese and Occupational War, of course.
And then, you know, I think when, in 1951, that's
the day when the South government The Soviet
government tried to set up a armed force. We had,
you know, a government, and they wanted to put, you
know, an armed force, and that's why I was enrolled
in the Air Force, which I remained there all the,
during all the war until 1974. I've been in the Air
Force when I fly. I flew in the transport group, and
I was a deputy member of the transport group
also. I was working under General Keating. And up
to 1964, And I was covered teeny-wide
in the Department of Civil
Ignition.
That was in 1974, when the Communist
Party took over. I came to the country of the United
States.
I was
married and I had five kids. I think that's it. I
said, can you come with your lot of folks? Before?
Yeah, before. Okay, well, I would say during my
training, you know, when I was in the Air Force, I
came in 1957. in the squadron
officer school down in Montgomery, Alabama. I was
training there for squadron
officer
school. In 1960, I came also to the United States,
but at that time, I was still working in civil
aviation. And then I came over here, and I came with
the FAA over
here. And then I come back and worked at the, let's
call it, you know, like the T-Works, you know, and
half in the Air Force and half
in Civil Aviation. And then in 1968, I was... I
signed, you know, to, uh, to be trained on, uh, 7.7,
4.8.7, before he come. Was the boy at that level?
Yeah. Who was this? At, uh, at Seattle? This boy?
Yeah. And after I, after my training, I go back, you
know, I fly on the, on the airline, the permission
of the airline. The Los Orleis? We call it Air
Vietnam. All right. This is the,
do you want to know more about it? It's this, yeah.
Here we go.
Well, you might rephrase this, you know. Oh, yeah.
You mean it's real to you? Mm-hmm. What do you see as
the root cause of the war, the full question, and
the origin of the war? The origin of the war? Well,
the way I can see this is, of course, the origin of
the war, you know, it's just the root causes of
this, you know, it's an uprising against the
colonial
power. But, think, you know, there are any
well-organized, you know, any unified front, you
know, so-called, you know, just to fight, you
know, with the science. And we had, you know, with
just a very few people, like I told you earlier,
maybe two or three people would be plan, you know,
and get the support, you know, for an economy of the
kind. But, actually, the root of the word is just
the word, you know, Odin, the colony
power. Okay.
well over the vietnamese people just like your
personal attitude towards because okay when the
abelians was under france almost a century about
80 up to 86 years and almost central all right the
first thing when the people see the japanese come
to occupy the country, and the Japanese also, you
know, give some kind of promise, saying, we will
take care of people, you know, and that. So, well,
see, when you, when you're under a rule of one
government, you know, for too long, and
sometimes, you know, you want some change, See?
And when people see the Japanese coming, the
people, the folks think people welcome, say,
well, maybe the Japanese can change, you know, the
situation for the better. But, and later on they
find, you know, the Japanese just, you know, like
the French, you know, just use this country, you
know, to... Just use it? Yes, use it. Why? See, so
the Japanese, you know, now the French, you know,
were substitute, that's all. They were
substitute? Yeah. Okay, so I didn't realize that.
But, okay, what else did the French do? All right,
the French, you know, had this company about 100
years, almost centuries. The education, you
know, like up to university.
Right in the South, you know, we doesn't have any
university. There's only, in the North Vietnam,
French, you know, have the school up there, the
so-called, you know, university. But this one of
the French, of the university, didn't have a full,
you know, a formation of, like, the technology
and everything. They just, okay, the school more
or less, you know, two-form people. so they can,
you know, work for the French government. You see,
like , and things like this, but not really for
technology, you know. They're just trying to
people for their own use. Yeah, see, okay now.
Otherwise, people want to get more education, you
know, that's only privileged people who can
afford enough money to go to France. Right. And
then they can get, you know, in the university in
terms of technology and how, but the people in the
country, you know, like middle class people, you
know, it's very hard. Because at this school, you
know, the higher education has become a
privilege, you know, it's not, you know,
appropriate. So most people, you know, maybe they
finish high school or maybe finish, what do you
call, you know, maybe just... Junior high. Junior
high and then quick, because they, they cannot
afford, you know, to go to college too. Because
people who worked there didn't have much money,
you know, like the French were. The French did, you
know. Because the French said, okay, now, they had
different, you know, trade. And the people,
you know, and some of the people did. What other
type of profession do you have in culture?
Or in education? Or language? Okay, and then, even
as you think, you know, that doesn't have any big
business, you know. Vietnamese didn't belong,
you know, they didn't have, they didn't own,
except for very little people, you know, like
those people who be like, you know, French users,
you know,
that some people was, was training French and was
employed by French, you know, as they The
government saw
them. And those people, you know, can have, you
know, maybe more failure and more privilege. But
as far as, you know, for the economy for the
country, it's just people just work on the rice
field, in the plantation, for crime. the earth you
know just enough you know for that that's all yeah
that french you know doesn't have those organized
you know like hospital you know and pre-care or
something like that yeah they do they do work in
that
and Oh, wow. Okay,
so where did you- French, you know, didn't
recognize religion, you know, like Buddhism,
French didn't recognize Buddhism. They called
it, you know, just an association, but it's not a
religion, it's an official religion. Well, the
majority of people are also with Buddhism, and
then when French come, Of course, you know,
Francis, you know, the Catholics, you know, and a
lot of people, also Catholics, also, you know,
those people, but more or less, you know, a pro very
close to Christ. And, well, you can see, majority,
maybe, I can say, you know, maybe 70%. The people of
Vietnam are Buddhists, they are more or less
Buddhists, but
really not really Buddhists, because they are
just a branch of Buddhism, more or less, you know,
they venerate parents, you know, You can have
maybe 60% of Buddhism, but anyhow Buddhism is not
recognized as a true religion.
Yeah, and you remember how you said that the
Japanese, they were really just a substitute for
the French, right? Yeah. How about in the U.S.?
Were they seen as the same? No.
Just stop this one, you know, when you talk about
the U.S. and everything. The nature of the war?
Okay, the nature of the war, you have, you know,
different, different, uh, phase there. The first
went, you know, the, the Vietnam uprising against
France. That, that's we, I can tell, you know, just
a, uh, against the, the colonial power. Yeah. But,
and then, We had, we was, or the, the Vietnam of
Park, you know, was infiltrated, you know, by the
communist section, or segment of the communists.
And it becomes, you know, this war, you know,
becomes, uh, Park, you know, under the
communists. The chance, you know, the chance to do
the way the war would be done, because, now,
when the country fights war, you'll be able to get
support, see, so you can fight. But now, if those,
the communists, they get support from the
communist power, See, then they fight, you know,
under the communist, you know, slogan, but it's
not, you know, nationalistic. But they can use,
they can use, you know, to come up like that. They
say, well, we fight to liberate the country. Yeah.
There is the end just because of me? Yeah, just
because of me. But they get the support from the
communists. Now,
in order to understand, you know, we have to look at
the communists, you know, what the communists
have tried to dominate the world, because
communists is not filed directly with the free
world. But you can call this kind of a proxy war.
They use the small countries to fight against the
free world.
Now this is the global strategy for the economy.
See, everywhere you have the free And communists,
you know, try to steer, you know, the solution.
Right. Because they can say, okay, well, you know,
but most of the country, people in France and in the
courts, that have the crossing funds are not very
high, they're not very educated people, you see
you have majority of people just illiterate, then
it's easy then to, the countries become easy to get
together to those people. Right, start a
revolution. How about the same question, there's
more when you're after the American revival, what
did the Vietnamese people think they were signing
for? Okay, you see, like I said, you know, when
Americans...
Okay, now, back to 1968, or before 68, 67,
the communists just say, well, think, you know,
Americans occupied Saudi Arabia, I mean, we tried
to free the Vietnams. That they start to think, you
know, put down or infiltrate more, you know, guns.
Okay, right in the South, you know, they
recognized, you know, one of the crime they
called, you know, But they said, well, they tried
to help those
people to liquidate,
and then so they became more against, you know,
more cash. Okay, and what happened? In South
Vietnam, they don't have bowels. From start, you
know, we got the bowels. But
by the nature of the war, you see, you fight a war,
it's not, you know, open world then you can send you
know all your division or battalion you know and
then after that you know you pull back and you
reorganize it but this is the get it a workplace You
have to strip things out because you have to
protect the main highway, you have to protect the
bridge, you have to protect everything. The
villages, you know, you have to protect the
people, you have to protect the power plant in the
city. So you have to have a lot of troops to protect
all those because the communists tried to
sabotage all of them. Now by nine, they just come
out, a train is approaching the highway. They put a
bomb in there, or they mine it. And in the morning
they kill people. They kill people.
Well, they kill, you know, because they say, well,
they make, you know, so people in the Fear cannot
use that thing. So you have to protect, you know,
those high walls. And if you don't protect, you
know, every night you had one picture blown. See,
they sent, you know, their suicide note, or squad,
whatever, you know, demolition team, you know.
And that's why, you know,
the government didn't have enough manpower. And
that's why, you know, when the President Johnson
was put in Vietnam, well, actually, Before that,
you know, there was some kind of incident also
involved, you know, directly to the American
Navy. Then you heard about Maddox, you know, the
ship, you know, was torpedoed or was attacked by
North Koreans or people, you know. But at that
time, because... U.S. Navy, you know, tried to try
to prevent, you know, infiltration, you know, by
sea. She tried to intercept, you know, with the
U.S. Navy, you know, tried to intercept and patrol
around. And that was, you know, was, well,
that was what incidents, you know, directly
involved. And then, you know, President Johnson
said, well, the communists, you know, attack, you
know, American troops that, you know, that go out,
you know, directly
with the Americans. But other Americans, you
know, can be more different. Now, when you get, you
know, okay, when you get, you know, a a large number
of Turks in there. But of course, the mission of the
Americans were there to protect. And so the
Vietnamese army can organize, you know, the
campaign around the countryside, you know, to get
much good. And as I said, you know, protect, you
know, those men of strategic power, you know, like
the Infiltration Front and the Communists and all
that. And there's since another day when, you
know, the Communists, you know, they changed the
tactics. They said, now we attack, you know, we
declare war with both, you know, the Americans and
then they, the kids, you know, fight with the
Americans. And they They broke it, you know, they
sent rockets, you know, to those American camps,
you know, to the rest of the American G.I. So now the
American commander, you know, or whoever field
commander over there, they cannot, you know, sit
like that, and they just work, you know, they just,
you know, kill us. see, then we have to spread out,
you know, to protect our area. See, so we have to
patrol, we have to do operations. But that's it for
every military doctrine will be sent. See, the
best defense is offense. See, because you're not
sitting there, you know, waiting till they come,
you know, shooting around and then, you know,
just kill you. So it seems that, it seems that What
they were really fighting for was just to protect
the different places where people... Well, first
one, you know, Americans didn't receive, you
know, all, you know, to fight. They would say,
well, okay, now, if they have been fighting on,
then they can just fight back. But the communists,
you know, keep attacking the Americans, no
matter, you know, where attack, you know, came, or
sabotage, you know, the airplane, you know, when
all the Americans were there, the airplane there.
So, in other words, you know, the communist
situation
directly, you know, confronted with Americans.
So that's why Americans themselves, you know, we
have to fight them. But, one of the, now, When, you
know, Americans protect those area, but cannot,
you know, stay, you know, and live in the camp, you
know, until it gets organized, they call local,
they call the, during the night. So the time has
come, you know, they try, you know, to storm in, or
they try to overrun those posts with Americans,
you know, and some get killed. Because that's why
the Seattle Commanders say, well, we have to send
our troops out, you know, to fire them, you know, to
throw them and kill them. It's not, you know,
they're sitting there waiting. People are not in
general over there. So that's the way, you know,
America is involved deeply, deeply. Now, you
talked about in countryside,
Every time, you know, when the American G.I.
report and that they conduct a question with
Jeremy, okay, and then some area,
American Conduct, you know, there are
operations, you know, for a couple of areas, like,
you know, in the way, the land, because you have a
big base, you know, with American G.I. here. So, in
this area, it's American breast surgery, because
they want to be involved, and they want to be, this
area will be clear all the time, they're sort of
going, you know, it's just a factor. Of course,
now, when you fight a war,
but a very war, you don't see the enemy. They didn't
wear the uniform. They're not going to wear the
uniform and fight you in the front line like this.
They just do snipers and booby traps and things
like that. Now, when the GI conduct operations and
go to the village, if some guy gets killed by
snipers, you don't know who in the house. Even us,
people in Germany, in Germany, we couldn't
recognize them. Even among us, because they are
like you and I, you know, they, you know, they're
just a person shooting, you know. You and I, maybe,
just take the gun and shoot people, and then just
dip the gun, you know, and then we become
civilians. This makes an American G.I.D. very
difficult for society to start with. And
sometimes, you know, you go and do it. I mean, our
people, they see, you know, the congressmen.
Nobody cares who they know where they are. Because
they don't speak the language.
And that's
why, you know, we call it the joint
army, you know, they had a combined corps. But
then, you can have, you know, a unit of nine forces.
Imagine there's some area
that's out of our control. And then the companies
come out. Then maybe it's just only one guy. They go
to the village, you see. They have to begin down,
they just call a couple of people and do it in the
night, you know, and talk. So they say, okay, now,
well, they say, well, you see, the Americans, you
know, tried to occupy the land, you know, kill the
people, you know, you see that, drop the bomb, you
know, dropping that one, you know, kill innocent
people. I mean, maybe two or three communists, you
know. under the, behind the bush, you know, yeah,
and just, you know, snipers. I don't know how you
can, how you can deter them. If you don't, if you
don't, you know, just shoot to those birds, you
know, and you can never get them. But they, they're
so smart that after they shoot, you know, and they
dig the hole, you know. And it's only, you know, if
the guy's sitting there in the house, you know, and
they don't know about it. But sometimes they
really don't know. Yeah. But you can prove
yourself, you know, I saw the people shoot from
this house. Yeah. You see, so, in every war, you
know, you had, you know, you had innocent people
killed. See? But, you know
what I'm saying? If Americans was killed, Well,
maybe the press and the media are just making noise
in the United States. You heard, you know, very
learned about the Communists knew this type of
tragedy to kill innocent people. And outside, you
know, in the free world, we had some documents, we
had pictures, so if, you know, the Communists go to
the village and kill the people, kill, you know,
the government, so, you know, going to the
government, the village chief, the village
leader, yeah, they kill you, you know, they just
cut the hand, all right? Well, is it just a photo
example? Yeah. You see, because they say, well,
and this guy, you know, gives, you know, they call,
you know, the South government puppet, American
puppet. They say, well, this guy, you know, gives
information from puppet
government, you know. And I said, both sides, you
know, you have atrocities. You see, when you try to
start a war, it's not, you know, an open war. Yeah.
You see? And you don't know where the citizens,
where the innocent ones are. You see? And you
fight, you know, one time you fight a war, but you
fight also the forgiveness, the communist
forgiveness. Every time you hit one innocent, you
see, the communists, you know, they... They use up
the money. They use up the forgiveness. But both
sides, you know, and the more, the more, the deeper
the G.I. go to the countryside, and they freshly
start to talk, sometimes, you know, the British
people, maybe sometimes they don't like, you
know, they say, well... They didn't know, you
know, they come, you know, to talk about and about,
you know, destroy my house and this and that, you
know. But in, in the big city, because the people
understand it, you know, but in the cars and things
like that, they didn't realize it. You see, for
those people listening, okay, now, if they don't
care about Congress, they don't care about
Martin, they don't care about the government,
they said, if they can have peace, But that's the
way the communists promised that. See now, if
Americans were defeated, or Americans were put
out, you know, we would have peace, and we would be
happy, you know.
All this because of Americans. It's not, you know.
Now, in that case also, you know, you can see But
during the time, you know, the war in Vietnam, the
communists, they think they can win the war in the
United States. They think they can win the war in
the United States? Yeah. See, because by, you
know, make all those propaganda. Then you can see
in the United States, you know, you had, you know,
demonstrations, you know, people, you know,
anti-war, you know, in Vietnam. Demonstration
and everything. Because they feel the
communists, they can feel a marginal is too,
well, it doesn't work, you know, to send, you know,
their children, you know, away, you know, in the
525-star world. See, they know well. You see? So,
if they can, you know, you... But some probably
moved to another country or to the media, and they
showed a picture of how, you know, Americans, uh,
dechorging house or bombing, you know, things
like that, you know, in the beginning. And then
this goes to come back to here in the United States.
And those young students, you know, in the United
States, they didn't know what the communists did.
They'd just see what I was... Yeah, they just, they
just saw that and said, why, you know, And then you
had, you know, an anti-war movement in the United
States. Just all this, you know, made it bad enough
for America to conduct the war. You see? And then
the country was divided, you know. You had, you
know, demonstrations, you had riots, you know, to
come against the world, you know. See, the
communists tried the Sam War, you know, like
during the French War also, okay? They tried to
hit, you know, they had to sympathize, you know, by
the French communists, okay? Now, any secret, you
know, through the consulate or through the
military consulate or whatever, you know, in
France, and the communists over there, you know,
they get information. before the French attack,
you know, every operation, you know, they knew all
this. See, because the Communist Party, you know,
were in the French government. And now, when the
Americans tried to work there, they had the same
tactics they used. See, they tried to make people
in the United States resent about this war, you
know, be tensed about this war, hate about this
war, you know. See, by demonstration, to make the
government, you know, turn the march and change
all decisions. So that was the compass, you know,
that said, well, you know, we send money and we
send... Actually, in Vietnam, in the war between
we...
Well, like I said, you know, the Vietnamese, they
fight because they knew And they knew the
Communists, you know, they couldn't live under
the Communists, because of the Communists
there's no freedom. The Communists is just, you
know, a big concentration camp. So that's why they
fought. So you think they were fighting just
against Communism? Yeah. You see, that's why in
all of Saudi Arabia now, you know, people are
fighting. But of course, I tell you, you know, like
right now, in the countryside, you know, far away,
you know, people doesn't have enough
information. See, and even now, you know, they get
maybe the print watch, you know, by the
communists. So they think, you know, if the
communists come, there will be... uh, more happy,
uh, communism provides, you know, more, uh,
change of the media, you see. But you can, you can
see now with all these, okay, uh, you see, when the
communists take over the country, you can see how
many Vietnamese are in the country, you see. We do
have the same also before, you know, when the, the
country was divided in two parts, Yeah. Okay, we
have, you know, about a million, almost two
million people living in the north. See, they
cannot stay in the north. Well, they left the north
to the south. Well, they left the north,
you know, they just moved to the south. Okay, those
people, you know, more or less, you know, employee
government, see, And it worked, you know, in the
city. See, because they knew, you know, what the
freedom is. They knew the economy, what the
economy was. Yeah. Okay. But the farmers, they
have nothing to do. You see, they don't care.
You see, like, okay, like, actually, you know,
okay, it's a farmer. You see, it's like, okay, now,
if I work for the government, I pray tax. See,
everything I have to do, I have to attach to the
government. See now, the Communists will do the
same. The Communists maybe take more. They don't
let them, you know, enough for their own, you know,
because they have to, everything they grow, you
know, they have to sell to the corporations, what
they call it. But, they say, well, at least, you
know, I don't have the war. Yeah. See, I can, I can
work on my film, you know. On your own land? Yeah.
See? But that's the way the, the people living, you
know, far countryside, they think.
Right. But until the day, you know, when they had,
you know, one communist come in the village and ask
them, you know, to do something, or they knew this
village, you know, had somebody, or maybe had the,
uh, sons, you know, with, uh, And you know, like in
the United States, there are a lot of different
views like this. The hawks,
you know what that is? The hawks are probably, they
believe that we are. Not because the Vietnamese
people are behind us, but because the American
public was there. Then you've got the Daoists who
believe that we could never have won the war
because the Vietnamese people weren't behind it,
and then you've got the counterinsurgency. You
heard of that? Yeah, I heard of it. Wow. Did those
type of ideas exist in Vietnam too? Now, in
Vietnam, we don't have this much of that, because
in Vietnam, we said, okay, You know, you find the
family, or you become slave to the family, you
know. So you don't have, you know, you don't have
picture. But some people try to, you know, to say,
well, maybe we can get along somehow, but they,
they, they don't know. You see, actually, it's
like to be a liberation song, for a time, you know.
Okay, most of those cards there, when the
combination will take over, those guys, you know,
they bring them down. So there is really just one
people that were amongst the people? Yeah. Other
than that, you know, I don't think that we don't
have to... I've lived, you know, in the city. We
tell you what, either we win the communist or we
die, that's all. Yeah. We don't have to. There is no
question of it. No question of it. This is
really... because those who go... because a lot of
the movements, you know, yeah, demonstrate, you
know, against the war, so we can have a lot of, a lot
of dull people. Because actually dull people,
maybe they do know, you know, what's the danger,
the danger of this war, because they don't need to
understand it. Because a merchant has a very a very
weak idea about what was the
communism. Okay. Or what it was like under
communism. Yeah. You see, in school, you know,
most of the school doesn't know much about
communism. Yeah. You see, even when I, okay, now,
when those, you know, the kids, you know, they come
home, But then maybe 75% of them can have the
economy,
you know, or you speak to them, you know, talk to
them. Maybe you have maybe one or two guys in there
because they say it's scary, you know, and then
that's how we take most of the economy, you know,
the economy. It's scary.
Yeah. Because I think the dose, you know, in the
United States of it, I don't know, it goes back
maybe because it goes back, you know,
in the United States of it. The thing is, when
President Nixon So, we're
still decreasing the fighting? Yeah, because
they're so, you know, they're infiltration. You
see, because they're so, they think, you know, in
my view, are making those lands now, they're not
here now. So they're starting to kind of flip it a
little bit. To be fine on the ground. But the thing
is, you know, that's too much. In the United
States, you know, did you hit, you know, Pearl when
you hit the count? And most of the congressmen,
opposed the war because too much, you know, human
life involved, too many lost G.I.Q.s. And that's
why the Congress, the United States Congress, you
know, was divided because due to those movements,
you know, and the war. And then the Congress
decided, well, we cannot win the war. At that time,
because, you know, this is, you know, seeing the
China, you know, be getting, you know, into the
war, yeah, into the war with, uh, with America, you
know. So, uh, Americans think, you know, well, we
just start to find, you know, a good thing with
South Vietnam. But the North, you know, keeps, you
know, sending troops down. You know, we try to
bombard, you know, the whole chimney dwellers, we
think, you know, during the day and during the
night.